THE TAO TEH KING — chapters 28–54
(from James Legge's 1891 translation, public domain. The wu-wei anchor: effortless
 non-action, the movement of the Tao by contraries, softness overcoming hardness,
 the uncarved block, knowing when to stop.)

28.

1.

   Who knows his manhood's strength,
   Yet still his female feebleness maintains;
   As to one channel flow the many drains,
   All come to him, yea, all beneath the sky.
   Thus he the constant excellence retains;
   The simple child again, free from all stains.

   Who knows how white attracts,
   Yet always keeps himself within black's shade,
   The pattern of humility displayed,
   Displayed in view of all beneath the sky;
   He in the unchanging excellence arrayed,
   Endless return to man's first state has made.

   Who knows how glory shines,
   Yet loves disgrace, nor e'er for it is pale;
   Behold his presence in a spacious vale,
   To which men come from all beneath the sky.
   The unchanging excellence completes its tale;
   The simple infant man in him we hail.

2. The unwrought material, when divided and distributed, forms
vessels.  The sage, when employed, becomes the Head of all the
Officers (of government); and in his greatest regulations he employs
no violent measures.


29. 1. If any one should wish to get the kingdom for himself, and to
effect this by what he does, I see that he will not succeed.  The
kingdom is a spirit-like thing, and cannot be got by active doing.  He
who would so win it destroys it; he who would hold it in his grasp
loses it.

2.

   The course and nature of things is such that
   What was in front is now behind;
   What warmed anon we freezing find.
   Strength is of weakness oft the spoil;
   The store in ruins mocks our toil.

Hence the sage puts away excessive effort, extravagance, and easy
indulgence.


30. 1. He who would assist a lord of men in harmony with the Tao will
not assert his mastery in the kingdom by force of arms.  Such a course
is sure to meet with its proper return.

2. Wherever a host is stationed, briars and thorns spring up.  In the
sequence of great armies there are sure to be bad years.

3. A skilful (commander) strikes a decisive blow, and stops.  He does
not dare (by continuing his operations) to assert and complete his
mastery.  He will strike the blow, but will be on his guard against
being vain or boastful or arrogant in consequence of it.  He strikes
it as a matter of necessity; he strikes it, but not from a wish for
mastery.

4. When things have attained their strong maturity they become old.
This may be said to be not in accordance with the Tao: and what is not
in accordance with it soon comes to an end.


31. 1. Now arms, however beautiful, are instruments of evil omen,
hateful, it may be said, to all creatures.  Therefore they who have
the Tao do not like to employ them.

2. The superior man ordinarily considers the left hand the most
honourable place, but in time of war the right hand.  Those sharp
weapons are instruments of evil omen, and not the instruments of the
superior man;--he uses them only on the compulsion of necessity.  Calm
and repose are what he prizes; victory (by force of arms) is to him
undesirable.  To consider this desirable would be to delight in the
slaughter of men; and he who delights in the slaughter of men cannot
get his will in the kingdom.

3. On occasions of festivity to be on the left hand is the prized
position; on occasions of mourning, the right hand.  The second in
command of the army has his place on the left; the general commanding
in chief has his on the right;--his place, that is, is assigned to him
as in the rites of mourning.  He who has killed multitudes of men
should weep for them with the bitterest grief; and the victor in
battle has his place (rightly) according to those rites.


32. 1. The Tao, considered as unchanging, has no name.

2. Though in its primordial simplicity it may be small, the whole
world dares not deal with (one embodying) it as a minister.  If a
feudal prince or the king could guard and hold it, all would
spontaneously submit themselves to him.

3. Heaven and Earth (under its guidance) unite together and send down
the sweet dew, which, without the directions of men, reaches equally
everywhere as of its own accord.

4. As soon as it proceeds to action, it has a name.  When it once has
that name, (men) can know to rest in it.  When they know to rest in
it, they can be free from all risk of failure and error.

5. The relation of the Tao to all the world is like that of the great
rivers and seas to the streams from the valleys.


33. 1. He who knows other men is discerning; he who knows himself is
intelligent.  He who overcomes others is strong; he who overcomes
himself is mighty.  He who is satisfied with his lot is rich; he who
goes on acting with energy has a (firm) will.

2. He who does not fail in the requirements of his position, continues
long; he who dies and yet does not perish, has longevity.


34. 1. All-pervading is the Great Tao!  It may be found on the left
hand and on the right.

2. All things depend on it for their production, which it gives to
them, not one refusing obedience to it.  When its work is
accomplished, it does not claim the name of having done it.  It
clothes all things as with a garment, and makes no assumption of being
their lord;--it may be named in the smallest things.  All things
return (to their root and disappear), and do not know that it is it
which presides over their doing so;--it may be named in the greatest
things.

3. Hence the sage is able (in the same way) to accomplish his great
achievements.  It is through his not making himself great that he can
accomplish them.


35. 1. To him who holds in his hands the Great Image (of the invisible
Tao), the whole world repairs.  Men resort to him, and receive no
hurt, but (find) rest, peace, and the feeling of ease.

2. Music and dainties will make the passing guest stop (for a time).
But though the Tao as it comes from the mouth, seems insipid and has
no flavour, though it seems not worth being looked at or listened to,
the use of it is inexhaustible.


36. 1. When one is about to take an inspiration, he is sure to make a
(previous) expiration; when he is going to weaken another, he will
first strengthen him; when he is going to overthrow another, he will
first have raised him up; when he is going to despoil another, he will
first have made gifts to him:--this is called 'Hiding the light (of
his procedure).'

2. The soft overcomes the hard; and the weak the strong.

3. Fishes should not be taken from the deep; instruments for the
profit of a state should not be shown to the people.


37. 1. The Tao in its regular course does nothing (for the sake of
doing it), and so there is nothing which it does not do.

2. If princes and kings were able to maintain it, all things would of
themselves be transformed by them.

3. If this transformation became to me an object of desire, I would
express the desire by the nameless simplicity.

   Simplicity without a name
   Is free from all external aim.
   With no desire, at rest and still,
   All things go right as of their will.





PART II.


38. 1. (Those who) possessed in highest degree the attributes (of the
Tao) did not (seek) to show them, and therefore they possessed them
(in fullest measure).  (Those who) possessed in a lower degree those
attributes (sought how) not to lose them, and therefore they did not
possess them (in fullest measure).

2. (Those who) possessed in the highest degree those attributes did
nothing (with a purpose), and had no need to do anything.  (Those who)
possessed them in a lower degree were (always) doing, and had need to
be so doing.

3. (Those who) possessed the highest benevolence were (always seeking)
to carry it out, and had no need to be doing so.  (Those who)
possessed the highest righteousness were (always seeking) to carry it
out, and had need to be so doing.

4. (Those who) possessed the highest (sense of) propriety were (always
seeking) to show it, and when men did not respond to it, they bared
the arm and marched up to them.

5. Thus it was that when the Tao was lost, its attributes appeared;
when its attributes were lost, benevolence appeared; when benevolence
was lost, righteousness appeared; and when righteousness was lost, the
proprieties appeared.

6. Now propriety is the attenuated form of leal-heartedness and good
faith, and is also the commencement of disorder; swift apprehension is
(only) a flower of the Tao, and is the beginning of stupidity.

7. Thus it is that the Great man abides by what is solid, and eschews
what is flimsy; dwells with the fruit and not with the flower.  It is
thus that he puts away the one and makes choice of the other.


39. 1. The things which from of old have got the One (the Tao) are--

   Heaven which by it is bright and pure;
   Earth rendered thereby firm and sure;
   Spirits with powers by it supplied;
   Valleys kept full throughout their void
   All creatures which through it do live
   Princes and kings who from it get
   The model which to all they give.

All these are the results of the One (Tao).

2.

   If heaven were not thus pure, it soon would rend;
   If earth were not thus sure, 'twould break and bend;
   Without these powers, the spirits soon would fail;
   If not so filled, the drought would parch each vale;
   Without that life, creatures would pass away;
   Princes and kings, without that moral sway,
   However grand and high, would all decay.

3. Thus it is that dignity finds its (firm) root in its (previous)
meanness, and what is lofty finds its stability in the lowness (from
which it rises).  Hence princes and kings call themselves 'Orphans,'
'Men of small virtue,' and as 'Carriages without a nave.'  Is not this
an acknowledgment that in their considering themselves mean they see
the foundation of their dignity?  So it is that in the enumeration of
the different parts of a carriage we do not come on what makes it
answer the ends of a carriage.  They do not wish to show themselves
elegant-looking as jade, but (prefer) to be coarse-looking as an
(ordinary) stone.


40.

1.

   The movement of the Tao
     By contraries proceeds;
   And weakness marks the course
     Of Tao's mighty deeds.

2. All things under heaven sprang from It as existing (and named);
that existence sprang from It as non-existent (and not named).


41. 1. Scholars of the highest class, when they hear about the Tao,
earnestly carry it into practice.  Scholars of the middle class, when
they have heard about it, seem now to keep it and now to lose it.
Scholars of the lowest class, when they have heard about it, laugh
greatly at it.  If it were not (thus) laughed at, it would not be fit
to be the Tao.

2. Therefore the sentence-makers have thus expressed themselves:--

  'The Tao, when brightest seen, seems light to lack;
   Who progress in it makes, seems drawing back;
   Its even way is like a rugged track.
   Its highest virtue from the vale doth rise;
   Its greatest beauty seems to offend the eyes;
   And he has most whose lot the least supplies.
   Its firmest virtue seems but poor and low;
   Its solid truth seems change to undergo;
   Its largest square doth yet no corner show
   A vessel great, it is the slowest made;
   Loud is its sound, but never word it said;
   A semblance great, the shadow of a shade.'

3. The Tao is hidden, and has no name; but it is the Tao which is
skilful at imparting (to all things what they need) and making them
complete.


42. 1. The Tao produced One; One produced Two; Two produced Three;
Three produced All things.  All things leave behind them the Obscurity
(out of which they have come), and go forward to embrace the
Brightness (into which they have emerged), while they are harmonised
by the Breath of Vacancy.

2. What men dislike is to be orphans, to have little virtue, to be as
carriages without naves; and yet these are the designations which
kings and princes use for themselves.  So it is that some things are
increased by being diminished, and others are diminished by being
increased.

3. What other men (thus) teach, I also teach.  The violent and strong
do not die their natural death.  I will make this the basis of my
teaching.


43. 1. The softest thing in the world dashes against and overcomes the
hardest; that which has no (substantial) existence enters where there
is no crevice.  I know hereby what advantage belongs to doing nothing
(with a purpose).

2. There are few in the world who attain to the teaching without
words, and the advantage arising from non-action.


44.

1.

   Or fame or life,
     Which do you hold more dear?
   Or life or wealth,
     To which would you adhere?
   Keep life and lose those other things;
   Keep them and lose your life:--which brings
     Sorrow and pain more near?

2.

   Thus we may see,
     Who cleaves to fame
     Rejects what is more great;
   Who loves large stores
     Gives up the richer state.

3.

   Who is content
   Needs fear no shame.
   Who knows to stop
   Incurs no blame.
   From danger free
   Long live shall he.


45.

1.

   Who thinks his great achievements poor
   Shall find his vigour long endure.
   Of greatest fulness, deemed a void,
   Exhaustion ne'er shall stem the tide.
   Do thou what's straight still crooked deem;
   Thy greatest art still stupid seem,
   And eloquence a stammering scream.

2. Constant action overcomes cold; being still overcomes heat.  Purity
and stillness give the correct law to all under heaven.


46. 1. When the Tao prevails in the world, they send back their swift
horses to (draw) the dung-carts.  When the Tao is disregarded in the
world, the war-horses breed in the border lands.

2. There is no guilt greater than to sanction ambition; no calamity
greater than to be discontented with one's lot; no fault greater than
the wish to be getting.  Therefore the sufficiency of contentment is
an enduring and unchanging sufficiency.


47. 1. Without going outside his door, one understands (all that takes
place) under the sky; without looking out from his window, one sees
the Tao of Heaven.  The farther that one goes out (from himself), the
less he knows.

2. Therefore the sages got their knowledge without travelling; gave
their (right) names to things without seeing them; and accomplished
their ends without any purpose of doing so.


48. 1. He who devotes himself to learning (seeks) from day to day to
increase (his knowledge); he who devotes himself to the Tao (seeks)
from day to day to diminish (his doing).

2. He diminishes it and again diminishes it, till he arrives at doing
nothing (on purpose).  Having arrived at this point of non-action,
there is nothing which he does not do.

3. He who gets as his own all under heaven does so by giving himself
no trouble (with that end).  If one take trouble (with that end), he
is not equal to getting as his own all under heaven.


49. 1. The sage has no invariable mind of his own; he makes the mind
of the people his mind.

2. To those who are good (to me), I am good; and to those who are not
good (to me), I am also good;--and thus (all) get to be good.  To
those who are sincere (with me), I am sincere; and to those who are
not sincere (with me), I am also sincere;--and thus (all) get to be
sincere.

3. The sage has in the world an appearance of indecision, and keeps
his mind in a state of indifference to all.  The people all keep their
eyes and ears directed to him, and he deals with them all as his
children.


50. 1. Men come forth and live; they enter (again) and die.

2. Of every ten three are ministers of life (to themselves); and three
are ministers of death.

3. There are also three in every ten whose aim is to live, but whose
movements tend to the land (or place) of death.  And for what reason?
Because of their excessive endeavours to perpetuate life.

4. But I have heard that he who is skilful in managing the life
entrusted to him for a time travels on the land without having to shun
rhinoceros or tiger, and enters a host without having to avoid buff
coat or sharp weapon.  The rhinoceros finds no place in him into which
to thrust its horn, nor the tiger a place in which to fix its claws,
nor the weapon a place to admit its point.  And for what reason?
Because there is in him no place of death.


51. 1. All things are produced by the Tao, and nourished by its
outflowing operation.  They receive their forms according to the
nature of each, and are completed according to the circumstances of
their condition.  Therefore all things without exception honour the
Tao, and exalt its outflowing operation.

2. This honouring of the Tao and exalting of its operation is not the
result of any ordination, but always a spontaneous tribute.

3. Thus it is that the Tao produces (all things), nourishes them,
brings them to their full growth, nurses them, completes them, matures
them, maintains them, and overspreads them.

4. It produces them and makes no claim to the possession of them; it
carries them through their processes and does not vaunt its ability in
doing so; it brings them to maturity and exercises no control over
them;--this is called its mysterious operation.


52. 1. (The Tao) which originated all under the sky is to be
considered as the mother of them all.

2. When the mother is found, we know what her children should be.
When one knows that he is his mother's child, and proceeds to guard
(the qualities of) the mother that belong to him, to the end of his
life he will be free from all peril.

3. Let him keep his mouth closed, and shut up the portals (of his
nostrils), and all his life he will be exempt from laborious exertion.
Let him keep his mouth open, and (spend his breath) in the promotion
of his affairs, and all his life there will be no safety for him.

4. The perception of what is small is (the secret of) clear-sightedness;
the guarding of what is soft and tender is (the secret of) strength.

5.

   Who uses well his light,
   Reverting to its (source so) bright,
   Will from his body ward all blight,
   And hides the unchanging from men's sight.


53. 1. If I were suddenly to become known, and (put into a position
to) conduct (a government) according to the Great Tao, what I should
be most afraid of would be a boastful display.

2. The great Tao (or way) is very level and easy; but people love the
by-ways.

3. Their court(-yards and buildings) shall be well kept, but their
fields shall be ill-cultivated, and their granaries very empty.  They
shall wear elegant and ornamented robes, carry a sharp sword at their
girdle, pamper themselves in eating and drinking, and have a
superabundance of property and wealth;--such (princes) may be called
robbers and boasters.  This is contrary to the Tao surely!


54.

1.

   What (Tao's) skilful planter plants
     Can never be uptorn;
   What his skilful arms enfold,
     From him can ne'er be borne.
   Sons shall bring in lengthening line,
   Sacrifices to his shrine.

2.

   Tao when nursed within one's self,
     His vigour will make true;
   And where the family it rules
     What riches will accrue!
   The neighbourhood where it prevails
     In thriving will abound;
   And when 'tis seen throughout the state,
     Good fortune will be found.
   Employ it the kingdom o'er,
     And men thrive all around.

3. In this way the effect will be seen in the person, by the
observation of different cases; in the family; in the neighbourhood;
in the state; and in the kingdom.

4. How do I know that this effect is sure to hold thus all under the
sky?  By this (method of observation).


